2282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
CGoFed: Constrained Gradient Optimization
Strategy for Federated Class Incremental Learning
Jiyuan Feng ,X uY a n g , Liwen Liang, Weihong Han, Binxing Fang, and Qing Liao , Member, IEEE
Abstract —Federated Class Incremental Learning (FCIL) has
emerged as a new paradigm due to its applicability in real-world
scenarios. In FCIL, clients continuously generate new data with
unseen class labels and do not share local data due to privacy
restrictions, and each client’s class distribution evolves dynamically
and independently. However, existing work still faces two signif-
icant challenges. Firstly, current methods lack a better balance
between maintaining sound anti-forgetting effects over old data
(stability) and ensuring good adaptability for new tasks (plastic-
ity). Secondly, some FCIL methods overlook that the incremental
data will also have a non-identical label distribution, leading to
poor performance. This paper proposes CGoFed, which includes
relax-constrained gradient update and cross-task gradient regular-
ization modules. The relax-constrained gradient update prevents
forgetting the knowledge about old data while quickly adapting
to the new data by constraining the gradient update direction
to a gradient space that minimizes interference with historical
tasks. The cross-task gradient regularization also ﬁnds applicable
historical models from other clients and trains a personalized global
model to address the non-identical label distribution problem. The
results demonstrate that the CGoFed performs well in alleviating
catastrophic forgetting and improves model performance by 8%
-23% compared with the SOTA comparison method.
Index Terms —Federated learning, class incremental learning,
catastrophic forgetting.
I. I NTRODUCTION
FEDERATED learning (FL) has emerged as a well-known
distribution learning paradigm that aims to collaboratively
Received 24 June 2024; revised 7 January 2025; accepted 14 February 2025.
Date of publication 24 February 2025; date of current version 25 March 2025.
This work was supported by the Guangdong Major Project of Basic and Applied
Basic Research under Grant 2019B030302002, in part by the the Major Key
Project of PCL under Grant PCL2024A05, in part by the Shenzhen Science
and Technology Program under grant ZDSYS20210623091809029, and in part
by the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence
Technologies under Grant under Grant 2022B1212010005. Recommended for
acceptance by Y . Tong. (Corresponding author: Qing Liao.)
Jiyuan Feng is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China, and
also with Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: fengjy@
stu.hit.edu.cn).
Xu Yang, Liwen Liang, and Binxing Fang are with the Department of Com-
puter Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shen-
zhen 518055, China (e-mail: xuyang97@stu.hit.edu.cn; LiwenLiang151101@
outlook.com; fangbx@cae.cn).
Weihong Han is with the Department of New Networks, Pengcheng Labora-
tory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: hanwh@pcl.ac.cn).
Qing Liao is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China, and
also with the Department of New Networks, Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
518055, China (e-mail: liaoqing@hit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3544605train global models across multiple clients without sharing client
data. FL provides a privacy-preserving solution to collabora-
tive training across clients and is widely applied in various
domains [1], including ﬁnance [2],[3], the Internet of Things
(IoT) [4],[5],[6], and healthcare [7],[8],[9], as it only transfers
model parameters without raw data [10],[11].
Federated learning (FL) commonly assumes that clients main-
tain a static label distribution of local data during the training and
testing phases of the model [2],[12],[13]. However, in the real
world, the label distributions of clients often change dynami-
cally over time [14],[15], and each local client continuously
introduces new classes to update the knowledge of the global
model [14]. This scenario, known as federated class incremental
learning (FCIL), also referred to as federated continuous learn-
ing or lifelong federated learning [16], reﬂects a more natural
and realistic setting. Given that clients in federated learning
are typically lightweight mobile devices with limited storage
capacity, constantly storing new data can lead to a signiﬁcant
memory crisis. If clients only store and train the model on the
new class, this can result in catastrophic forgetting of the old
class, as the model may struggle to distinguish between the
old class and the new data. Therefore, addressing catastrophic
forgetting in FCIL requires extensive attention and exploration.
The key to addressing the catastrophic forgetting problem
in federated class incremental learning (FCIL) lies in training
a model that achieves a suitable balance between stability and
plasticity. In FCIL, regularization techniques and memory-based
replay techniques are commonly employed. However, current
FCIL methods, particularly those based on regularization, often
fall short of delivering satisfactory results, especially as the
number of tasks increases. For instance, CFeD [17] is a regular-
ization method that utilizes distillation learning to mitigate the
forgetting problem. It achieves this by transferring knowledge
from a previously converged model to the current model through
a surrogate dataset. However, distillation-based methods like
CFeD heavily rely on pseudo-labels assigned to the surrogate
dataset. As the number of tasks continues to increase, the gen-
erated pseudo-labels may become increasingly biased, resulting
in the model’s diminished ability to learn new tasks and forget
the knowledge of previous tasks.
In addition to addressing catastrophic forgetting, FCIL meth-
ods also face the problem of non-identical label distribution in
incremental data across clients. Speciﬁcally, the incremental
data contributed by each client at each task may belong to
entirely different class distributions, resulting in suboptimal
performance. For example, Dong et al. [16] propose GLFC, a
1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2283
rehearsal-based method that leverages a proxy server (memory
buffer) to select the optimal model from previous tasks, thereby
retaining prior knowledge and achieving high performance.
However, GLFC assumes that the classes of new tasks for all
clients are drawn from the same distribution, which is atypical in
real-world scenarios. In a more general setting, the classes of new
tasks for different clients originate from diverse distributions.
This class incremental scenario presents a more demanding
challenge for aggregating the global model, as it experiences
signiﬁcant drift due to the non-identical label distributions of
new tasks across clients.
We summarize the above-mentioned issues as the trade-off
problem between stability and plasticity and the problem of
non-identical label distribution for incremental data in Feder-
ated Class Incremental Learning (FCIL). Our paper proposes a
Constrained-based Gradient optimization strategy for Federated
Learning, called CGoFed , to address these two problems. In
CGoFed, we introduce a relaxed constrained gradient update
module to address catastrophic forgetting in FCIL, balancing
stability and plasticity. This module restricts the direction of
gradient updates based on the gradient space of the previous
task, ensuring that the updated model parameters do not interfere
with the historical tasks. Additionally, we propose a cross-task
gradient regularization module to handle non-identical label
distributions in incremental data, using a historical task selection
mechanism to identify the most relevant tasks for the current
task. We also design two Class Incremental Settings to evaluate
existing FCIL methods in general federated scenarios. CGoFed
achieves promising results, balancing stability (anti-forgetting)
and plasticity (task adaptation) across diverse datasets. The
contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:rWe summarize two signiﬁcant challenges in federated
class incremental learning, including the trade-off problem
between stability and plasticity and the problem of non-
identical label distribution in incremental data. We propose
the CGoFed to solve the above problems.rWe develop the relax-constrained gradient update module
in CGoFed to ensure that the updated model parameters
for new tasks do not interfere with historical tasks while
effectively balancing the stability of old tasks and the
plasticity of new tasks.rWe design a cross-task gradient regularization module of
CGoFed to address the problem of non-identical label
distribution in incremental data. This module leverages the
historical models of other clients that are most relevant to
each task, thereby enhancing the overall performance and
adaptability of the system.rWe compare CGoFed with other FCIL methods under two
different class incremental settings. Experimental results
indicate that CGoFed is highly competitive in alleviating
forgetting and enhancing the performance of the global
model compared to existing methods.
II. R ELATED WORK
We categorize existing federated class-incremental learn-
ing methods into expansion-based, regularization-based, and
memory-based methods [18].A. Expansion-Based Methods
These methods often improve robustness against catastrophic
forgetting by decoupling or reconstructing the model structure
to expand the model capacity.
For instance, Yoon et al. [19] propose FedWeIT, which splits
parameters into global, local base, and task-adaptive parameters.
FedWeIT achieves knowledge transfer and addresses the catas-
trophic forgetting problem by sharing task-speciﬁc parameters
between clients. Hendryx et al. [20] utilize prototypical networks
to implement fast knowledge transfer without gradient-based
learning, mitigating catastrophic forgetting when clients indi-
vidually learn a growing set of classes. In FCIL, a ﬁxed-capacity
model is more practical because clients have limited resources.
B. Regularization-Based Methods
Regularization-based methods penalize signiﬁcant parame-
ter changes associated with previous tasks by incorporating a
regularization term into the classiﬁcation loss function. This
approach effectively prevents catastrophic forgetting during the
training of new tasks [21]. For instance, Kirkpatrick et al. [22]
introduce Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC), which con-
strains parameters near the old task parameters by incorporating
a quadratic penalty term when learning a new task. Shoham
et al. [23] propose FedCurv, which employs EWC to penalize
parameters that signiﬁcantly change during the new task and
are critical in the old task using a diagonal Fisher information
matrix. However, this method disregards or alters the change
trajectory of the model in the parameter space, negatively im-
pacting the model’s performance on new tasks.
Other regularization-based methods employ knowledge dis-
tillation techniques that rely on surrogate datasets to transfer
knowledge from old tasks. For example, Li et al. [24] propose
Learning without Forgetting and its extended version [24], which
design a knowledge distillation loss to retain knowledge from
previous tasks while optimizing accuracy on new tasks. Xu
et al. [25] propose FedReg, which mitigates forgetting by reg-
ularizing local model parameters using generated pseudo data
that encode knowledge of past tasks. Lee et al. [26] design a
distillation loss using the global model’s prediction on locally
available data to acquire new knowledge and prevent catas-
trophic forgetting. Ma et al. [17] propose CFeD, in which each
client transfers the knowledge of old tasks to the new model
through a surrogate dataset, and the server distills the knowledge
of the previous round model into a new aggregation model to
address catastrophic forgetting.
Knowledge distillation typically constructs the same sample-
label mapping relationship, enabling the trained model for the
old task to transfer knowledge to the new task model [27],[28].
However, as the number of tasks or the task offset increases,
the mapping relationship for previous tasks can degrade or
become incorrect. This degradation causes performance decline
in prior tasks and increases noise in the learning process of
new tasks [29], leading to a poor balance between plasticity
and stability.
C. Memory-Based Methods
These methods typically retain a subset of data from previ-
ous tasks to mitigate forgetting by preserving knowledge from
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
Fig. 1. Illustration of FCIL. In federated class incremental learning, the client ﬁrst trains the local model on task 1 and uploads it to the server. The server
aggregates the local model to get the global model. As the class of data increases, the client trains the local model on task 2 and uploads it to the server . Finally,
the server aggregates the global model suitable for the new task. It’s noted that all clients train the local model independently on their task stream.
previous tasks in the form of data, gradients, parameters, models,
and other representations.
For example, inspired by iCaRL [30], Zhang et al. [31]
propose generating synthetic data from a generative model to
capture the global data distribution and transfer knowledge of
old tasks to current tasks, preventing catastrophic forgetting.
Bakman et al. [32] improve the centralized continual learn-
ing method GPM to address global catastrophic forgetting in
federated class-incremental learning, ensuring that updates for
new tasks are orthogonal to the activation principal subspace of
previous tasks. Dong et al. [16] propose GLFC, which designs a
class-aware gradient compensation loss to solve the local forget-
ting problem caused by the continuous emergence of new classes
in clients. GLFC constructs an exemplar memory mechanism
using a proxy server to select a subset of previous tasks to retain
prior knowledge. LGA [33], an extension of GLFC, relies on
the server to reconstruct perturbed images and select the best
old model.
These methods achieve an acceptable effect in preventing
catastrophic forgetting. However, they still need to address the
more challenging incremental scenario where new task data for
all clients come from different label distributions, a problem we
refer to as non-identical label distribution for incremental data.
III. D ISCUSSION ON FCIL
We formally deﬁne federated class incremental learning and
summarize two incremental-data settings in the client.
A. Federated Class Incremental Learning
We ﬁrst introduce the concept of FCIL in terms of client, task,
server, and optimization objective, as shown in Fig. 1.
Clients: We consider Kclients, each indexed by k. Clientk
can only access a tasks sequence and is prohibited from access-
ing previous tasks while training the current task t.F o rt a s k t,
clientktrains a local model Θt
kusing the same convolutional
neural network model with Γlayers.Tasks: The sequence of tasks is represented as
{D1
k,D2
k,...,DT
k}, where Dt
k={(xt
k,i,yt
k,i)|0<i≤nt
k}
denotes the private dataset of the t-th task for the client k.T h i s
dataset comprises nt
kinstances, each consisting of features xt
k
and their corresponding labels yt
k.
Server: The server aggregates the local models of all the
clients to obtain a personalized global model Θt,g
kexclusively
for the client k. The model parameters are denoted as Θ=
{(θl)Γ
l=1}, whereθlrepresents the parameters of the l-th layer.
Optimization Objective: Finally, FCIL expects to minimize
the loss of all tasks among all samples. The optimization objec-
tive of FCIL can be written as follows:
min
ΘT/summationdisplay
t=1K/summationdisplay
k=1nt
k
NtL/parenleftbig
Dt
k;Θ/parenrightbig
(1)
wherent
kis the number of training samples of client k,Ntis
the sum of all nt
kat taskt.
B. Catastrophic Forgetting
In neural networks, catastrophic forgetting refers to the signif-
icant memory loss for previously learned tasks or data when the
model learns new data or tasks [34],[35].L e tΘinitrepresent a
neural network model in its initial state. After training on a series
of tasks, the model reaches a state Θt. When the model learns a
new taskTnew, its state changes to Θnew. If the model’s perfor-
mance on an old task Tolddecreases signiﬁcantly, from Pold(Θt)
toPold(Θnew), i.e.,Pold(Θnew)/lessmuchPold(Θt), this is considered
catastrophic forgetting. The root cause of catastrophic forgetting
is that when the neural network model learns a new task, it
updates weights through gradient descent, which can disrupt the
weight distribution of the previous task. Consequently, learning
new tasks leads to a sharp decline in the performance of old
tasks. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 2.N e wt a s k s( n e w
classes of data) can signiﬁcantly alter the model’s parameters,
causing the gradient update direction to move towards a space
that is irrelevant to the old task.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2285
Fig. 2. The gradient update direction of the old task keeps in its feature
subspace, but after the new task appears, the gradient is updated to the space
unrelated to the old task.
Fig. 3. Illustration of two different incremental data scenarios, where each row
representing a task sequence for each client. Subﬁgure (a) shows the Identical
New-Class scenario, where data for the same task (each column) across different
clients are drawn from identical label distributions. Subﬁgure (b) shows the
Non-Identical New-Class scenario, where data for the same task (each column)
across different clients are drawn from non-identical label distributions.
C. Incremental-Data Deﬁnition
In this paper, we are the ﬁrst to propose addressing the
non-identical label distribution problem for incremental data
in FCIL [36]. Here, we analyze the problem we solved and
deﬁne in detail two different types of incremental data settings
in federated learning.
Currently, most existing federated class incremental learn-
ing methods usually ideally assumes all clients have identical
task sequences. In this scenario, all client data with the same
task ID have the same class label distribution. We refer to
this incremental data scenario as identically incremental data
(Identical New-Class). However, in the real world, clients collect
or produce local data independently, leading to different clients’
incremental data derived from non-identical label distributions.
We refer to this incremental data scenario as non- identicalin-
cremental data (Non-Identical New-Class). Here, we provide a
deﬁnition of the two incremental data scenarios.
Deﬁnition 1 (Identical New-Class): Deﬁne the t- t ht a s ko f
clientkasDt
k. The label of new tasks added by client kdoes
not appear in the history tasks of any other client, i.e., Dt
k∩/uniontextt−1
ι=1Dι=∅.F i g . 3(a)
shows.
Deﬁnition 2 (Non-Identical New-Class): The label of new
tasks added by client kmay have already appeared in a historical
task for any other client, i.e., Dt
k∩/uniontextt−1
ι=1Dι/negationslash=∅.F i g . 3(b)
shows.
Section V-A will detail how to split the dataset to generate the
above two incremental data scenarios.IV . O URMETHOD :C G OFED
In this section, we introduce our CGoFed method. We ﬁrst in-
troduce the conventional gradient-based method and notations in
Section IV-A . Then, we discuss the relax-constrainted gradient
update module of CGoFed to achieve a good balance between
stability (anti-forgetting) and plasticity (adapting new tasks) in
detail in Section IV-B . Finally, we present the cross-task gradient
regularization module of CGoFed to alleviate the problem of
non-identical label distribution in FCIL in Section IV-C .
A. Strong-Constrainted Gradient Update
Previous works propose the gradient-based method to prevent
forgetting and realize forward knowledge transfer in continu-
ous learning. Here, we brieﬂy introduce conventional strong-
constrainted gradient update method in three critical steps.
1) Constructing Representations Space: Gradient-based
methods utilize the gradient obtained by training the model
on a subset of samples to represent the gradient space of the
entire task. Assume that task tis currently being trained. The
representation matrix of the gradient space for task tis obtained
through forward propagation of the model Fas follows:
Rt=F(Θt,Xt), (2)
whereRt=[ zt
1,zt
2,...,zt
ns]is the representation matrix for
taskt.Xt={xi}ns
i=1containsnssamples randomly sampled
from the data Dtof the current task.
2) Solve for Orthogonal Basis: After computing the repre-
sentation matrix for task t, gradient-based methods apply a ma-
trix factorization algorithm to obtain basis vectors representing
the gradient space of task t. The Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) algorithm is the most commonly used matrix decompo-
sition method, and its formula is as follows:
Rt=UtΣt(Vt)/latticetop, (3)
whereUtandVtare orthogonal singular matrices, the left
singular matrix Utis a canonical orthogonal basis spanning Rn.
Multiplying the gradient of the new task by the left singular
matrixUtand its transpose matrix (Ut)/latticetopprojects the gradient
into the orthogonal space of the gradient of the old task. The
matrixΣtstores the singular values along its diagonal. To obtain
a more compact representation matrix, we use the norm-based
criteria to compute the κ-rank approximation (Rt)κofRtas
follows:
/vextenddouble/vextenddouble(Rt)κ/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
F≥/epsilon1/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleRt/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
F, (4)
where/bardbl·/bardbl2
Fdenotes the Frobenius norm, and (Rt)κcontains
the top-κlargest singular values along its main diagonal. The
threshold /epsilon1controls the number of selected singular values and
basis vectors. A larger /epsilon1results in more orthogonal basis vectors
and a higher dimension of the orthogonal gradient space Mt.
The representation space St=span{ut
1,ut
2,...,ut
κ}for taskt
is spanned by the ﬁrst κcolumn vectors in left singular matrix Ut.
The basis vectors of Stare stored in memory M={(Mt)T
t=1},
whereMt=[ut
1,ut
2,...,ut
κ]. The singular values correspond-
ing to each basis vector from a matrix Σt=[σt
1,σt
2,...,σt
κ].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
3) Scaling Basis Vector: In conventional gradient-based
methods, all basis vectors have the same weight when con-
structing the gradient space, offering stability to old tasks to
some extent by maintaining uniform importance across tasks.
However, recent models exhibit varying levels of forgetting
across different old tasks, necessitating greater attention to tasks
experiencing higher forgetting. Inspired by the non-uniform dis-
tribution of singular values, we calculate the importance of basis
vectors using these singular values to bolster stability for crucial
tasks. Terming the variable basis vector approach, we modify the
process of deriving orthogonal bases in typical gradient-based
methods using the singular values Σt=[σt
1,σt
2,...,σt
κ]ob-
tained in (3), we transform these singular values into important
coefﬁcient Λt=[λt
1,λt
2,..., λt
κ]using the sigmoid function,
preserving the original proportion of singular values Σt.T h e
process is as follows:
Λt=1
1+e−Σt. (5)
Before training task t+1, we employ the importance coefﬁcient
Λas the weight for each basis vectors Mt=[ut
1,ut
2,...,ut
κ]to
adjust the gradient space. This weighted adjustment transforms
the basis vectors into Mt=[λt
1·ut
1,λt
2·ut
2,..., λt
κ·ut
κ]based
on their singular value distribution. Following this strategy, as
tasks accumulate, previous task’s basis vectors receive higher
relative weights, thereby enhancing the model’s performance
on those tasks.
However, the aforementioned gradient-based method restricts
the gradient update direction of training new tasks to the orthog-
onal direction of the old task space, which is not always globally
optimal. As the number of new tasks increases, the model’s
plasticity to new tasks diminishes within the limited gradient
space, making it challenging to achieve a satisfactory balance
between stability and plasticity.
B. Relax-Constrainted Gradient Update
In this subsection, we propose a relax-constrained gradient
update module to improve the plasticity of the model for new
tasks. We ﬁrst describe the normal gradient constraint process
and then introduce our proposed relaxation strategy.
1) Normal Gradient Constraint: After completing the train-
ing of task t, all clients will begin training on the new task t+1.
The new task often brings many new classes, causing the descent
direction of the model gradient to shift rapidly to the gradient
space of the new task. The dramatic shift in descent direction
is the root cause of the severe performance degradation on the
old task. Therefore, we aim for the gradient update to occur in
the gradient space orthogonal to the old task, as expressed in the
following formula:
∇Θt+1Lt+1=∇Θt+1Lt+1−/parenleftbig
∇Θt+1Lt+1/parenrightbig
Mt(Mt)/latticetop.(6)
At the end of the new task training, we update the memory M
that stores the basis vectors of all tasks. As mentioned above,
this constraining process is too strict and limits the performance
of the model on new tasks.
2) Variable Gradient Constraint: To enhance the model’s
plasticity for new tasks, we propose a technique called variable
Fig. 4. The diagram of Variable Gradient Constraint technique. When the
update direction of the new task is not constrained, it only stays in the unrelated
subspace of the old task, resulting in catastrophic forgetting. When the update
direction is strictly constrained in the orthogonal direction, the adaptability of
the new task is decreased due to the limited gradient space. When using the
variable gradient constraint technique, the gradient update direction of the new
task can be expanded and orthogonal to subspace of the old task.
gradient constraint. This technique allows for ﬂexible adjust-
ment of the model’s plasticity on new tasks. As depicted in Fig. 4,
the strict constraint on the gradient update direction is identiﬁed
as a signiﬁcant factor contributing to poor plasticity. To address
this issue, we expand the update range of the gradient, enabling
the model to adapt more effectively to new tasks. This slight
angle deviation is introduced by incorporating an adjustable
constraint strength coefﬁcient, denoted as μ, during the gradient
update. We gradually reduce the constraint strength coefﬁcient
during the training process, providing strong constraints in the
early tasks to ensure stability, and gradually relaxing the con-
straints as training progresses to improve plasticity on new tasks.
Moreover, when forgetting reaches a certain threshold τin the
later stages of training, we automatically tighten the constraints
to prevent signiﬁcant forgetting. The relaxation process is as
follows:
f(α,t)=αt, (7)
μt=/braceleftbiggμinitf(α,t) ifAF < τ,
μinitf(α,t−tτ)ifAF≥τ,(8)
wheref(α,t)=αtis used to model the exponential decay of
the constraint strength with respect to the task index t. Here,μt
represents the constraint strength coefﬁcient for task t, control-
ling the degree of deviation from the orthogonal direction. We
utilize a decay rate αto dynamically adjust the coefﬁcient μfor
each task based on the average forgetting ( AF) observed during
training.tτdenotes the most recent task number at which AF
exceeds the threshold τ.μinitis the initial constraint strength
coefﬁcient, typically set to μinit=1. According to (6)and(8),
we reformulate the gradient update procedure as follows:
∇Θt+1Lt+1=∇Θt+1Lt+1−μt(∇Θt+1Lt+1)Mt(Mt)/latticetop.(9)
We introduce a novel relax-constrained gradient update mod-
ule designed to improve adaptability to new tasks and ensure
stability for existing tasks using an adjustable constraint strength
coefﬁcient. To optimize the balance between plasticity and sta-
bility, we dynamically adjust the decay rate of the constraint
strength coefﬁcient and achieve a good balance between the
stability of old tasks and plasticity for new tasks.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2287
C. Cross-Task Gradient Regularization
In this subsection, we propose a cross-task gradient regular-
ization module of CGoFed to solve the problem of non-identical
label distribution for incremental data between the clients in
federated class incremental learning.
Each client’s task streams are independent, leading to unique
class distributions in incremental data at each time step. This
independence poses a challenge for server aggregation, as lo-
cal models may interfere with each other. It is intuitive that
the current task of client imay overlap with historical tasks
of another client j. Therefore, leveraging valuable knowledge
from historical models of other clients can mitigate catastrophic
forgetting and improve the global model’s performance on the
current task. Next, we elaborate on our novel cross-task gradient
regularization module, which integrates historical models from
other clients into the optimization objective.
Firstly, the proposed cross-task gradient regularization mod-
ule operates by computing and transmitting the representation
matrixRtof the current task tto the server, along with the
uploaded model parameters at the conclusion of each task.
To derive Rt, each client randomly samples and computes it
using (2)upon task tcompletion. This matrix shufﬂes feature
representations across all sample batches, ensuring that previous
task data is not directly shared and avoiding potential breaches
of sample-level privacy. This method is computationally efﬁ-
cient, requiring no additional communication or computational
overhead.
Secondly, for each client k, the server calculates the similarity
matrixΨkbetween the current task tand all tasks of other clients
(indexed by i). Here,ϕt
idenotes the similarity between client
k’s current task and client i’st-th task. The computation of Ψk
andϕt
iis detailed below:
Ψk=⎡
⎢⎢⎣ϕ1
1···ϕt
1
.........
ϕ1
i···ϕt
i⎤
⎥⎥⎦,ϕt
i=D/parenleftbig
Rt
i,Rt
k/parenrightbig
. (10)
The similarity function Demploys the L2-norm distance, where
Rt
iandRt
kdenote the representation matrices of client iand
clientk, respectively.
Thirdly, the server employs a task selection mechanism to
chooseπhistorical tasks with the lowest ϕvalues for client k,
based on its representation matrix Ψk. These selected historical
tasks have shown signiﬁcant improvements for the global model
on clientk’s current task through the computation of the cross-
task cooperation loss, which is detailed as follows:
A/parenleftbig
Θt
k,Θold/parenrightbig
=t−1/summationdisplay
j=0π/summationdisplay
i=0ϕj
i/summationtext
i∈πϕj
i/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleΘt
k−Θj
i/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
, (11)
where we select two other clients ( π=2) that exhibit the lowest
ϕvalues across historical tasks for each client k. This results in
obtainπ∗(t−1)historical task models are expressed by Θold,
which are used to compute the regularization loss during training
of thet-th task.
Lastly, the t-th column vector of the matrix signiﬁes the
similarity between the client kand other clients ifor current taskTABLE I
TIMECOMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
t. To enhance the model’s performance, the server performs per-
sonalized aggregation for client kusing the similarity between its
model and these of other clients on the current task tas follows:
Θt,g
k=Θt
k+/summationdisplay
i∈K\kϕt
i/summationtext
i∈K\kϕt
iΘt
i. (12)
The aggregate weights are computed based on the similarity of
all representations from the previous training round. The ratio
between the model of client kand the sum of the models from
other clients can be set empirically.
To summarize, we rewrite the optimization objective of the
local model for each client kat tasktas follows:
CEk(Θt
k)=1
nt
knt
k/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xt
k,i;Θt,g
k),yt
k,i), (13)
min
Θt,g
k/bracketleftBigg
1
KK/summationdisplay
k=1Lk/parenleftbig
Θt
k/parenrightbig
+A/parenleftbig
Θt
k,Θold/parenrightbig/bracketrightBigg
, (14)
where/lscript(ˆy,y)is the cross-entropy loss function. We combine
the local loss function with the cross-task gradient regulariza-
tion loss to obtain the complete optimization objective via the
(14). Finally, the detailed process of CGoFed is described in
Algorithm 1.
D. Time Complexity
Denote the number of clients, client samples, feature dimen-
sions, and parameter dimensions as K,N,k, andd, respec-
tively. The time complexity analysis of each module is shown
in Table I. On the client side, all clients execute model train-
ing, orthogonal gradient updates, representation construction,
and singular value decomposition (SVD) in parallel. The time
complexity of client training is proportional to the data size
and model parameter dimension, resulting in a complexity of
O(N·d). The time complexity of orthogonal gradient updates
is determined by projection calculations, which typically have
a complexity of O(d2). Representation construction and SVD
involve multiple iterations and matrix-matrix operations, with
the primary computational cost arising from eigenvalue de-
composition or iterative processes. This yields a complexity
ofO(d2·logk). Therefore, the total time complexity on the
client side is O(N·d+d2+d2·logk). On the server side, the
model parameters and representations sent by the clients are
aggregated. The time complexity for calculating the similarity
matrix using client representations is O(K2·d), while the com-
plexity for model aggregation is O(K·d). Hence, the total time
complexity on the server side is O(K2·d+K·d).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
Algorithm 1: Constrained Gradient Optimization Strategy
for Federated Class Incremental Learning.
The computational complexity of our method mainly arises
from performing SVD. To reduce this overhead, SVD is per-
formed only once per task, reducing its impact on model training
time. In our experiments, we provide a detailed comparison of
time consumption on the CIFAR-100 and Tiny-ImageNet-200
datasets in Section VI-F . Overall, the results demonstrate that
our approach achieves practical efﬁciency, making it suitable for
real-world applications.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed CGoFed method for
two different class incremental learning scenarios on multiple
datasets.
A. Datasets
We conduct experiments on image datasets, CIFAR-100 [37]
and Tiny-ImageNet-200 [38], as well as graph datasets, Cora-
Full [39] and Reddit [40], to validate the effectiveness of our
proposed CGoFed method across diverse datasets.Image Datasets: The CIFAR-100 dataset contains 60,000
color images with 100 classes, each class has 600 images
(32x32 pixels with 3 color channels). The Tiny-ImageNet-200
dataset contains 100,000 color images with 200 classes, each
class has 500 images (64x64 pixels with 3 color channels).
These datasets are extensively used to evaluate class incremental
learning methods [32],[41].
Graph Datasets: The CoraFull and Reddit datasets are widely
used benchmarks for graph-based machine learning tasks. The
CoraFull dataset is a citation network consisting of 19,793 nodes
and 126,842 edges, where nodes correspond to documents and
edges represent citation relationships. Each node is associated
with a feature vector of size 8,710, and the dataset includes 70
classes. The Reddit dataset is a large-scale social network graph
with 232,965 nodes and 11,606,919 edges. Nodes represent
posts, and edges connect posts shared by the same users. Each
node has a feature vector of size 602, and the dataset contains
41 classes. We train node classiﬁcation models on both graph
datasets to evaluate the performance of the methods in diverse
scenarios of federated class-incremental learning.
Split Incremental Data Scenario: In class incremental learn-
ing, the training data is split into task sequences, and the
training data belonging to different tasks have different class
labels. Therefore, class incremental learning necessitates the
model to have the ability to differentiate between known classes
from previous tasks and new classes for the current task. For
instance, the model might initially learn about “ﬁsh” and “lion”
from task 1 and subsequently about “rose” and “peony” from
task 2. The class incremental learning method requires distin-
guishing between “rose” and “lion” among the different tasks.
We partition the Identical New-Class and Non-Identical New-
Class incremental data scenarios as deﬁned in Section III.C.
First, we divide the entire dataset into non-overlapping task
sequence {D1,D2,...,DT}. For example, in the CIFAR-100
dataset, all classes are numbered from 0 to 99. Assuming
there are 10 tasks, with each task containing 10 classes, the
task sequences are as follows: TaskD1={0,1,...,9},Task
D2={10,11,...,19},...,TaskD10={90,91,...,99}.For
Identical New-Class , each client samples from task sequence
{D1,D2,...,DT}, such as Dt
k⊂Dtis thet-th task of client
k, to generate its private task sequence {D1
k,D2
k,...,DT
k}.T h e
dimension of the model’s classiﬁer increases with the number of
tasks. For Non-Identical New-Class , each client also samples
from the task sequence to generate its private dataset. Then, each
client independently shufﬂes its task sequence to obtain a new
task sequence, such as {D4
k,DT
k,...,D1
k}. Finally, each client
trains its local model following the shufﬂed order. The dimension
of the model’s classiﬁer is ﬁxed to the number of classes in the
dataset.
B. Baseline Methods
We compare CGoFed with 7 baseline methods and clearly
explain the reasons for choosing these baselines, including:rFedAvg [12] :This naive FL method uses FedAvg to ag-
gregate local models in class incremental tasks, serving as
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2289
the theoretical lower bound for forgetting in FCIL due to
its lack of forgetting mitigation mechanisms.rFedEWC [22] :We include EWC as a regularization-
based method that mitigates catastrophic forgetting by
re-weighting the importance parameter of old tasks. We
extend this widely cited method to federated learning and
name it FedEWC.rFedLwF [24] :We include LwF as a regularization-based
method for its strong representative in continuous learning,
where it mitigates catastrophic forgetting by preserving
knowledge of previous tasks through knowledge distilla-
tion. As a widely recognized method balancing new and
old task learning, we extend LwF to the federated learning
setting and name it FedLwF.rCFeD [17] :We include CFeD as a regularization-based
method because of its effectiveness in mitigating catas-
trophic forgetting in FCIL. Using class-wise feature distil-
lation, it preserves prior knowledge while adapting to new
tasks; this is a strong benchmark in the federated setting.rTARGET [31] :We include TARGET as a memory-based
method because it employs a generative model to create
synthetic data, effectively addressing catastrophic forget-
ting in FCIL. TARGET transfers knowledge from old
tasks to new ones with synthetic data, making it a strong
benchmark for ensuring stability and performance across
sequential tasks.rGLFC [16] :We include GLFC as a memory-based method
because it selects the best model using a proxy server to
preserve prior knowledge while learning new tasks in a
federated setting. Replaying a portion of historical data
effectively balances knowledge retention and adaptation,
serving as a strong benchmark to mitigate forgetting and
improve performance in FCIL.rFedWeIT [19] :We include FedWeIT as a baseline for its
role as a representative expansion-based method in FCIL.
It mitigates catastrophic forgetting by dividing network
weights into global and sparse task-speciﬁc parameters,
re-weighting the latter to transfer knowledge across clients.
Its innovative strategy for balancing model capacity growth
and knowledge preservation makes it a strong benchmark
for FCIL.
C. Implementation Details
We use the simple but efﬁcient AlexNet [42] network for
CIFAR100 and Tiny-imagenet by following [32],[41].W es e t
10 clients, each client with 10 tasks, and trained each task in
sequence. Each task will train for 20 communication rounds,
and the local epochs of each client are 5 in each communication
round, the learning rate is 0.01, and the mini-batch size is 64.
For node classiﬁcation tasks of graph datasets, we employ a two-
layer Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) as the local model
with a 256-dimensional hidden layer and an output layer whose
size depends on the number of classes. The learning rate is set to
0.0001 for the CoraFull dataset and 0.01 for the Reddit dataset.
All experiments were conducted on a T4 GPU, utilizing a ﬁxedrandom seed to ensure the reproducibility and accuracy of the
results.
D. Evaluation Metrics
In class incremental learning, we follow the Average Accuracy
and Average Forgetting metrics commonly used in previous
work [22],[43],[44],[45] to evaluate the effect of methods
in mitigating catastrophic forgetting. To calculate the Average
Accuracy , after training task t, we test the accuracy of the current
model on the trained task and obtain the at,iwherei≤t.T h e
Average Accuracy of all the Ttasks is deﬁned as follows:
AT=1
TT/summationdisplay
i=1at,i, (15)
The Average Forgetting is deﬁned as the averaged disparity
between minimum task accuracy during training all tasks. For
Ttasks, the Average Forgetting is computed as follows:
AF=1
T−1T−1/summationdisplay
i=1max
t∈1,...,T−1(at,i−aT,i) (16)
Note,AF∈[−1,1],l o w e rFimplies less forgetting on pre-
vious tasks. The forgetting metric represents the difference
between the maximum knowledge about the previous tasks
acquired throughout the learning process and the knowledge of
previous tasks the model retains.
E. Experimental Results
We conduct experiments on two incremental data scenarios:
Identical New-Class and Non-Identical New-Class. Table II
shows the average accuracy and forgetting metric after learning
all the federated class incremental learning tasks. The exper-
iment results demonstrate that our proposed CGoFed method
performs best on CIFAR-100 and Tiny-Inagenet-200 datasets.
GLFC and FedWeIT are two laudable federated class incre-
mental learning methods. The AFof FedWeIT is comparable
to our CGoFed, under CIFAR-100 and Tiny-ImageNet-200
datasets and two incremental data scenarios. However, the aver-
age accuracy of CGoFed is still higher than the above two meth-
ods, especially on the more challenging Tiny-ImageNet-200
dataset; our advantage is more signiﬁcant, with an improvement
of 21.35% .
Besides, we observe that FedAvg suffers from severe catas-
trophic forgetting, showing the highest forgetting regardless of
which incremental data scenario. We also see that classical class
incremental learning methods such as FedEWC and FedLwF
perform poorly in federated learning. Due to the differences in
the class distribution of clients in federated learning, the aggre-
gation process of the global model will interfere with the model
parameter distribution after each round of training, thus affecting
the effect of these methods. In particular, FedEWC needs to
estimate the weight parameters of previous tasks, and model
aggregation seriously interferes with the weight distribution of
previous tasks. Thus, FedEWC has had little improvement in
FedAvg.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS BETWEEN CGOFED AND COMPARED METHOD WITHTWODIFFERENT DATAINCREMENTAL SCENARIOS
ONCIFAR-100 AND TINY-IMAGE NET-200 D ATASET AT10 T ASKS
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN CGOFED AND BASELINE METHODS ON
GRAPH DATASETS :CORAFULLWITH7TASKS AND REDDIT WITH10 T ASKS
For two incremental data scenarios, in CIFAR-100, GLFC and
TARGET have higher average accuracy in the Non-Identical
New-Class scenario, 2.3% -4.4% more elevated than in the
Identical New-Class scenario. The Identical New-Class scenario
is the more challenging setting because each task brings more
new classes, making it more difﬁcult for the model to adapt to the
new class. Our CGoFed method has achieved far better results
than the comparison methods, no matter what incremental data
scenario.
F . Result of Graph Learning
To evaluate the effectiveness of CGoFed on diverse datasets,
we conducted experiments using graph datasets. Notably, most
existing FCIL methods are speciﬁcally designed for image data
and are incompatible with graph datasets and GNN models.
Therefore, we can only adapt two regularization-based methods,
FedEWC and FedLwF, for use with GNN models to enable a fair
comparison. The results of these experiments are summarized in
Table III. The results demonstrate that CGoFed consistently out-
performs baseline methods (FedAvg, FedEWC, and FedLwF) on
both the CoraFull and Reddit datasets in terms of A7andAF.
On the two datasets, CGoFed achieves the highest accuracy of
76.38% and 69.20% , signiﬁcantly outperforming the baseline
methods. It also demonstrates the lowest AF of 0.2095 and
0.2831, respectively. These results highlight the adaptability of
our method to different types of data and models. While the
performance of the comparative methods is less satisfactory, it
consistents with the the accepted benchmark of graph continual
learning [46],[47].
G. Result of Task Accuracy
It is worth mentioning that the FedWeIT is the most ef-
fective method for mitigating the forgetting problem amongall the compared methods in both incremental data scenarios,
while CFeD exhibits high adaptability to new tasks (detailed in
Section VI-B ). Therefore, we plot the accuracy change curve
for each task of CFeD, FedWeIT, and CGoFed, starting from
the prior task of each task. As shown in Fig. 5, our proposed
CGoFed method quickly adapts to each task at the beginning
and maintains or even improves task accuracy after completion,
particularly for Task 5 and Task 8. However, after training
per task, each task of CFeD showed a severe accuracy drop
during the new task training phase. We analytically consider that
the reasons for the poor effect of CFeD include the following
two aspects. Firstly, the CFeD method is only suitable for a
small number of tasks (T =2), as mentioned by [17]. When
the number of tasks increases, the distillation loss term of this
method will consider more and more historical tasks, and the
distillation effect of a single historical task or early task will
decline rapidly. Second, distillation-based methods usually rely
on particular surrogate datasets. Our investigation shows that
the surrogate dataset provided by CFeD is only suitable for the
simple CIFAR100, but severe forgetting still occurs for the more
challenging Tiny-Imagenet-200. Its average forgetting metric
is higher than EWC and LwF but lower than FedAvg. The
fundamental reason is the limited capacity of previous tasks’
knowledge carried by the distillation loss term, and it cannot
play a good role when the number of tasks is large.
H. Result of Non-IID Scenario
To further verify that our CGoFed method can still perform
well in the non-independent identically distributed (Non-IID)
scenario popular in federated learning, we experiment with the
Non-IID setting, the same as the TARGET method [31].W es e t
different Dirichlet parameters βto generate different Non-IID
Settings, i.e., β={0.05,0.1,0.5,1}, and the Average Accuracy
and the Average Forgetting metrics are shown in Fig. 7.T h eA v -
erage Accuracy and Average Forgetting metric of our CGoFed
are better than those of the comparison methods, regardless of
which Non-IID setting. The lower the Dirichlet parameter, the
more severe the Non-IID data distribution between clients. The
Average Forgetting metric of CGoFed decreases as the degree
of Non-IID exacerbates. When the data distribution is extremely
imbalanced ( β=0.05), CGoFed has the highest anti-forgetting
ability, and the Average Accuracy is 21.89% higher than the op-
timal comparison method (LwF). When the Dirichlet parameter
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2291
Fig. 5. Accuracy change curves of each task for FedWeIT, CFeD and CGoFed methods in the CIFAR-100 dataset, Identical New-Class scenario.
Fig. 6. Performance comparisons between CGoFed and other methods in Identical New-Class and Non-Identical New-Class scenarios with CIFAR-100 and
Tiny-ImageNet-200 datasets.
is 1, the difference in Average Accuracy and Average Forgetting
metrics is slight compared to the IID setting. The above results
forcefully show that our method can alleviate the catastrophic
forgetting problem when the client data is Non-IID in federated
learning.
The severe performance degradation of these comparison
methods is due to these regularization methods relying on a
loss function based on predicted labels to prevent excessive
updates to model parameters, thus mitigating catastrophic for-
getting. However, the predicted labels are affected by the data
distribution, which means that the predicted labels are difﬁcult to
align with the true labels under the extreme non-IID distribution,
leading to severe bias in the loss function, and thus resulting
in signiﬁcant performance degradation of the regularization
method. In contrast, CGoFed is independent of the distribution
of predicted labels, making it less sensitive to variations in
data distribution. Consequently, it outperforms the comparison
methods in extreme Non-IID scenarios.
VI. A NALYSIS
A. Forgetting Analysis
We plotted the variation curve of the historical task average
accuracy at the end of each task during training as shown in
Fig. 6. In the training process of all tasks, our CGoFed methodalways maintains an excellent anti-forgetting effect, and even
when training the later tasks, CGoFed can not only balance the
accuracy of historical tasks but also improve the performance of
the current task. In the CIFAR-100 dataset, the anti-forgetting
effect of GLFC and FedWeIT is second only to CGoFed but
signiﬁcantly higher than other comparison methods. The vari-
ation curve of the average accuracy of FedWeIT is smoother,
but the average accuracy is 10.94% lower than that of CGoFed.
The variation curve of the average accuracy of GLFC has a
slight downward trend. However, it can still maintain good
performance in the training process of each task, so it has a
high average accuracy. The variation curve of the average accu-
racy of other comparison methods has an inevitable and severe
decline. In the Tiny-ImageNet-200 dataset, The anti-forgetting
effect of FedWeIT also shows a severe decrease and a sudden
inﬂection point. The FedWeIT method preserves the knowledge
in previous tasks by freezing the model parameters of historical
tasks, and the model parameters with general knowledge cannot
distinguish the new class well.
B. Adaptability Analysis of New Tasks
An important metric for evaluating federated class incre-
mental learning methods is their ability to adapt to new tasks.
Incremental learning methods often face the stability-plasticity
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
Fig. 7. The Average Accuracy and Average Forgetting for all learned tasks on
CIFAR100 for 10 tasks under both Non-IID and IID settings.
dilemma [48],[49], including in federated class incremental
learning. During the learning of new tasks, the model should
not only have the ability to adapt to the new task quickly but
also retain knowledge from previous tasks.
Therefore, we plotted the accuracy variation of the current task
during the ﬁrst ﬁve training rounds for the last task. We focus
on the model’s ability to rapidly adapt to new tasks in the early
rounds rather than the ﬁnal accuracy achieved on these tasks.
The adaptability of all compared methods to new tasks is shown
in Fig. 8. In the CIFAR-100 dataset, CGoFed demonstrates
superior performance with minimal tuning, achieving over 50%
accuracy after the ﬁrst round of new tasks. While FedWeIT and
GLFC also adapt quickly to new tasks, their accuracy is lower
than that of CGoFed. Notably, CFeD requires re-learning for
new tasks but shows good adaptability. This result aligns with
the stability-plasticity dilemma in incremental learning: CFeD
exhibits high plasticity (quick adaptation to new tasks) but low
stability (quick forgetting of old tasks). In contrast, our proposed
CGoFed method balances stability and plasticity.
C. Impact of Constraint Strength Coefﬁcient α
The hyper-parameter αcontrols the constraint strength of the
task gradient. To investigate the impact of the hyper-parameter,
we conduct experiments on the CIFAR-100 dataset with a Non-
Identical New-Class task distribution, focusing on the impact
of constraint strength αon the plasticity of new tasks. Accord-
ingly, we measure the accuracy of new tasks after each task iscompleted and illustrate the accuracy variation as the number of
tasks increases. The results are depicted in Fig. 9. Whenα=1,
the constraint strength of the gradient update direction remains
unchanged, resulting in a strictly orthogonal update direction
and the lowest accuracy for each task at the end of training. By
gradually reducing the constraint strength, i.e., decreasing α,w e
observe an increase in the accuracy of each task. This indicates
enhanced plasticity for new tasks, and the enhancement is more
pronounced as the number of tasks increases. When α=0.98,
our method signiﬁcantly improves the plasticity of the new task
compared to strict constraint gradient update direction ( α=1).
However, when α<0.98, the improvement in plasticity dimin-
ishes. Therefore, we present the accuracy on each task and the
Average Forgetting ( AF) after training all tasks for values of
αless than 1 and greater than 0.98in Table IV. The results
indicate that our proposed method does not cause substantial
forgetting. The AFis close to the optimal comparison method
(AF=0.0292) and signiﬁcantly lower than other methods
(AF=0.3494). Overall, we enhance the model’s plasticity on
new tasks and ﬁnal performance with minimal negative impact.
D. Impact of Threshold τ
The threshold τin(7)and(8)determine when to reset the
constraint strength coefﬁcient to prevent further forgetting. To
examine the impact of τon ﬁnal accuracy, we conduct exper-
iments on the CIFAR-100 dataset using a Non-Identical New-
Class task distribution. These experiments are carried out under
the constraint strength with decay rate α=0.98and various
values of τ={0,0.001,0.01,0.05}, with the results presented
in Fig. 10. According to our strategy in (7)and(8), whenever
the Average Forgetting ( AF) exceeds the threshold, resetting the
constraint strength helps reduce AFand avoid forgetting. When
τ=0, the reset occurs on task 0,at τ=0.001, it happens on
task 3; at τ=0.01, it happens on task 4; and at τ=0.05,i t
occurs on task 6. Selecting an appropriate threshold allows the
constraint strength to be reset at the appropriate time, such as
withτ=0.01, where AF ﬂuctuates minimally in later tasks(The
distance between the dashed lines is the smallest). However,
whenτ>0.01, AF increases more, leading to a signiﬁcant drop
in anti-forgetting performance (AF up to 0.1076). On the other
hand, when τ<0.01, the constraint strength is reset too early
during training, ﬁxing it at an initial value for the rest of the
process, as a result, the constraint cannot be effectively relaxed
and the AF ﬂuctuates greatly, making it difﬁcult to ﬁnd a good
balance between keeping old tasks stable and adapting to new
tasks.
E. Ablation Studies
Table Vpresents the results of ablation studies. ”Ours-w/o
Regular” represents the results when our method does not
use the cross-task gradient regularization module. The results
demonstrate that the cross-task gradient regularization module
can effectively improve the accuracy of the ﬁnal global model
by 3.17% . We did not remove the relax-constrained gradient
update module because it is essential for addressing the for-
getting problem. Our method performs similarly to FedAvg
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2293
Fig. 8. Comparison of adaptability to new tasks between CGoFed and other methods in Identical New-Class and Non-Identical New-Class scenario with
CIFAR-100 and Tiny-ImageNet-200 datasets.
TABLE IV
ACCURACY (ACC) OFEACH TASK ATT H E END OF WHOLE TRAINING FOR DIFFERENT CONSTRAINT STRENGTH COEFFICIENT αONCIFAR100 D ATASET AND
UNDER NON-IDENTICAL NEW-CLASS SCENARIO
Fig. 9. The accuracy of new tasks with different αvalues.
TABLE V
ABLATION RESULT (%) ONCIFAR-100
when the relax-constrained gradient update module is not used.
It should be noted that the cross-task gradient regularization
module primarily enhances the performance of the global model.
However, as a regularization term, it has a very limited effect on
mitigating forgetting, as veriﬁed in the ﬁeld of continual learn-
ing. Additionally, we compared a “Strict Constraint” gradient
update strategy [50], which performed worse than “Ours-w/o
Regular”. This result demonstrates that our relaxed strategy
not only improves average accuracy but also better mitigates
forgetting, effectively achieving a balance between stability and
plasticity.
Fig. 10. Average Forgetting ( AF) trend under different thresholds ( τ) with
a constraint strength decay rate of α=0.98, on the CIFAR-100 dataset with
Non-Identical New-Class task distribution.
F . Efﬁciency Analysis
To validate the efﬁciency of CGoFed, we compared the train-
ing times of CGoFed with other methods on the CIFAR-100
and Tiny-ImageNet-200 datasets under Identical New-Class and
Non-Identical New-Class scenarios. Fig. 11demonstrates that
the training time of CGoFed is signiﬁcantly lower compared
to the current state-of-the-art methods, GLFC and FedWeIT,
across two different datasets; thus, CGoFed has a great ad-
vantage in terms of efﬁciency. Similar trends are observed for
Tiny-ImageNet-200, where CGoFed maintains efﬁcient training
times even as the dataset complexity increases, signiﬁcantly
outperforming most baselines. Although our training time is
slightly higher than CFeD, FedLwF, and FedEWC, our per-
formance is substantially better. Overall, CGoFed achieves
an acceptable performance while maintaining optimal time
efﬁciency.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 5, MAY 2025
Fig. 11. Performance comparisons between CGoFed and other methods in
Identical New-Class and Non-Identical New-Class scenarios with CIFAR-100
and Tiny-ImageNet-200 datasets.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, this paper presents the CGoFed method to
address the trade-off problem between stability and plasticity
in federated class incremental learning by focusing on gradi-
ent updates. Our method relax-constrained the gradient update
direction of the local model to preserve knowledge from pre-
vious tasks without revisiting historical task data or relying on
auxiliary datasets. Additionally, we designed a regularization
loss to facilitate client cross-task cooperation from the server’s
perspective. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the ef-
fectiveness of our method compared to existing federated class
incremental learning methods.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y . Shi, Y . Tong, and Y . Zhang, “A survey on federated
learning: A perspective from multi-party computation,” Front. Comput.
Sci., vol. 18, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 181336.
[2] Q. Yang, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Y . Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. , vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 1–19, 2019.
[3] C. Zhang, S. Li, J. Xia, W. Wang, F. Yan, and Y . Liu, “BatchCrypt:
Efﬁcient homomorphic encryption for cross-silo federated learning,” in
Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. USENIX Assoc. , 2020, pp. 493–506.
[4] N. Sun, W. Wang, Y . Tong, and K. Liu, “Blockchain based federated
learning for intrusion detection for Internet of Things,” Front. Comput.
Sci., vol. 18, no. 5, Art. no. 185328, 2024.
[5] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, Z. Han, E. Hossain, and C. S. Hong, “Federated
learning for Internet of Things: Recent advances, taxonomy, and open
challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1759–1799,
Third Quarter 2021.
[6] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and H.
V . Poor, “Federated learning for Internet of Things: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1622–1658,
Third Quarter 2021.
[7] D. C. Nguyen et al., “Federated learning for smart healthcare: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–37, 2022.
[8] J. Li et al., “A federated learning based privacy-preserving smart health-
care system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2021–2031,
Mar. 2022.
[9] J. Xu, B. S. Glicksberg, C. Su, P. Walker, J. Bian, and F. Wang, “Federated
learning for healthcare informatics,” J. Healthc. Inform. Res. ,v o l .5 ,
pp. 1–19, 2021.
[10] P. Zhou, K. Wang, L. Guo, S. Gong, and B. Zheng, “A privacy-preserving
distributed contextual federated online learning framework with Big Data
support in social recommender systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. ,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 824–838, Mar. 2021.[11] W. Guo, F. Zhuang, X. Zhang, Y . Tong, and J. Dong, “A comprehensive
survey of federated transfer learning: Challenges, methods and applica-
tions,” Front. Comput. Sci. , vol. 18, no. 6, 2024, Art. no. 186356.
[12] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist. , 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[13] S. Guo, X. Wang, S. Long, H. Liu, L. Hai, and T. H. Sam, “A federated
learning scheme meets dynamic differential privacy,” CAAI Trans. Intell.
Technol. , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1087–1100, 2023.
[14] Y . Shi, Y . Tong, Y . Zeng, Z. Zhou, B. Ding, and L. Chen, “Efﬁcient
approximate range aggregation over large-scale spatial data federation,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 418–430, Jan. 2023.
[15] X. Yang, H. Yu, X. Gao, H. Wang, J. Zhang, and T. Li, “Federated continual
learning via knowledge fusion: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. ,
vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 3832–3850, Aug. 2024.
[16] J. Dong et al., “Federated class-incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit „ 2022, pp. 10164–10173.
[17] Y . Ma, Z. Xie, J. Wang, K. Chen, and L. Shou, “Continual federated
learning based on knowledge distillation,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell. , 2022, pp. 2182–2188.
[18] M. De Lange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in
classiﬁcation tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 44, no. 7,
pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022.
[19] J. Yoon, W. Jeong, G. Lee, E. Yang, and S. J. Hwang, “Federated continual
learning with weighted inter-client transfer,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. , 2021, pp. 12073–12086.
[20] S. M. Hendryx, D. R. Kc, B. Walls, and C. T. Morrison, “Feder-
ated reconnaissance: Efﬁcient, distributed, class-incremental learning,”
2021, arXiv:2109.00150 .
[21] Y . Wang et al., “Distribution-regularized federated learning on non-IID
data,” in Proc. Int Conf. Data. Eng. , 2023, pp. 2113–2125.
[22] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural net-
works,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA , vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526, 2017.
[23] N. Shoham et al., “Overcoming forgetting in federated learning on non-IID
data,” 2019, arXiv:1910.07796 .
[24] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018.
[25] C. Xu, Z. Hong, M. Huang, and T. Jiang, “Acceleration of federated learn-
ing with alleviated forgetting in local training,” 2022, arXiv:2203.02645 .
[26] G. Lee, M. Jeong, Y . Shin, S. Bae, and S.-Y . Yun, “Preservation of the
global knowledge by not-true distillation in federated learning,” in Proc.
36th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2022, pp. 38461–38474.
[27] J. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Guo, D. Zeng, J. Zhou, and A. Y . Zomaya, “Towards
data-independent knowledge transfer in model-heterogeneous federated
learning,” IEEE Trans. Comput. , vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 2888–2901, Oct. 2023.
[28] Y . Chen, W. Lu, X. Qin, J. Wang, and X. Xie, “MetaFed: Federated learning
among federations with cyclic knowledge distillation for personalized
healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 35, no. 11,
pp. 16671–16682, Nov. 2024.
[29] R. Aljundi, P. Chakravarty, and T. Tuytelaars, “Expert gate: Lifelong
learning with a network of experts,” in Proc. 30th IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2017, pp. 2001–2010.
[30] S.-A. Rebufﬁ, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “iCaRL:
Incremental classiﬁer and representation learning,” in Proc. 30th IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2017, pp. 2001–2010.
[31] J. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Zhuang, and L. Lyu, “TARGET: Federated class-
continual learning via exemplar-free distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit , 2023, pp. 4782–4793.
[32] Y . F. Bakman, D. N. Yaldiz, Y . H. Ezzeldin, and S. Avestimehr, “Federated
orthogonal training: Mitigating global catastrophic forgetting in continual
federated learning,” 2023, arXiv:2309.01289 .
[33] J. Dong, H. Li, Y . Cong, G. Sun, Y . Zhang, and L. V . Gool, “No one left
behind: Real-world federated class-incremental learning,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 2054–2070, Apr. 2024.
[34] M. McCloskey and N. J. Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in connec-
tionist networks: The sequential learning problem,” in Psychology of
Learning and Motivation . Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1989,
pp. 109–165.
[35] R. Ratcliff, “Connectionist models of recognition memory: Constraints
imposed by learning and forgetting functions,” Psychol. Rev. , vol. 97, no. 2,
Art. no. 285, 1990.
[36] X.-C. Li et al., “Map: Model aggregation and personalization in federated
learning with incomplete classes,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 6560–6573, Nov. 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FENG et al.: CGOFED: CONSTRAINED GRADIENT OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY FOR FEDERATED CLASS INCREMENTAL LEARNING 2295
[37] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, Learn. Mult. Layers Features Tiny Images ,
vol. 1, p. 7, 2009.
[38] S. University, “Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge,” 2015. [On-
line]. Available: https://tiny-imagenet.herokuapp.com/
[39] A. K. McCallum, K. Nigam, J. Rennie, and K. Seymore, “Automating
the construction of internet portals with machine learning,” Inf. Retrieval ,
vol. 3, pp. 127–163, 2000.
[40] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learn-
ing on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2017,
pp. 1024–1034.
[41] G. Saha, I. Garg, and K. Roy, “Gradient projection memory for continual
learning,” 2021, arXiv:2103.09762 .
[42] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classiﬁca-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM , vol. 25,
pp. 84–90, 2012.
[43] A. Chaudhry, P. K. Dokania, T. Ajanthan, and P. H. Torr, “Riemannian walk
for incremental learning: Understanding forgetting and intransigence,” in
Proc. 15th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2018, pp. 532–547.
[44] R. Kemker, M. McClure, A. Abitino, T. Hayes, and C. Kanan, “Measuring
catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” in Proc. 32nd AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell. , 2018, pp. 3390–3398.
[45] S. I. Mirzadeh, M. Farajtabar, R. Pascanu, and H. Ghasemzadeh, “Under-
standing the role of training regimes in continual learning,” in Proc. 34th
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2020, pp. 7308–7320.
[46] Y . Liu, R. Qiu, and Z. Huang, “CaT: Balanced continual graph learning
with graph condensation,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining ,
2023, pp. 1157–1162.
[47] X. Zhang, D. Song, and D. Tao, “CGLB: Benchmark tasks for continual
graph learning,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2022,
pp. 13006–13021.
[48] M. Masana, X. Liu, B. Twardowski, M. Menta, A. D. Bagdanov, and
J. V . De Weijer, “Class-incremental learning: Survey and performance
evaluation on image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. , vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5513–5533, May 2023.
[49] M. Mermillod, A. Bugaiska, and P. Bonin, “The stability-plasticity
dilemma: Investigating the continuum from catastrophic forgetting to
age-limited learning effects,” Front. Psychol. , vol. 4, 2013, Art. no. 504.
[50] G. Saha and K. Roy, “Continual learning with scaled gradient projection,”
inProc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , 2023, pp. 9677–9685.
Jiyuan Feng received the ME degree in computer
technology from the Department of Cyberspace Se-
curity, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China, in
2022. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
with the Department of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen),
Shenzhen, China. His research interests include fed-
erated learning, continual learning, and data mining.
Xu Yang received the ME degree in computer science
and technology from the Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technol-
ogy (Weihai), Weihai, China, in 2021. He is currently
working toward the PhD degree with the Department
of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin In-
stitute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China.
His research interests include federated learning, data
mining, and machine learning.
Liwen Liang received the BS degree in computer
science and technology from the Department of Com-
puter Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of
Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China, in 2023.
He is currently working toward the ME degree with
the Department of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen),
Shenzhen, China. His research interests include fed-
erated learning, domain generalization, and machine
learning.
Weihong Han received the MS degree from the Na-
tional University of Defense Technology, China, in
1997, and the PhD degree from the National Univer-
sity of Defense Technology, in 2000. She is member
of the Cyber Security Association of China. From
2002 to 2017, she worked with the National Univer-
sity of Defense Technology. Now, she is a researcher
with the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng
Laboratory, China. Her current research interests in-
clude computer network and network security.
Binxing Fang received the MS degree in computer
science and technology from Tsinghua University,
Beijing, in 1984, and the PhD degree in computer
science and technology from the Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin, in 1989. He is currently a
member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering. His
current research interests include computer networks,
information and network security, and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence security.
Qing Liao (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
from the Hong Kong University of Science and Tech-
nology, in 2016. She is currently a professor with
the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China.
Her research interests include data mining, artiﬁcial
intelligence and information security, etc.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on December 30,2025 at 06:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 